---
last_name: Costa
first_name: Fernanda M. Borges da
title: "From Cosmos to Chaos: Unravelling Aeschylus' *Oresteia* and *Prometheus Bound* through the Presocratic Lenses"
institution: Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro
email: ferborges@letras.ufrj.br
---
The Presocratic philosophy profoundly impacted Greek thought during the transition from the archaic to the classical era. Yet, our classical education, with a tendency for hyper-specialisation, tends to obscure the depth of philosophical speculation involved in the composition of classical tragedy. If tragedy, as a poetic art, draws its mythical narratives from epic and Hesiodic poetry, it is not unreasonable to suggest that it also incorporates from somewhere it’s tendency towards profound inquiries into humanity and its coexistence with nature and the gods. Those trends, we suggest, were likely instilled by the first philosophers who first questioned myth and reality, and undoubtedly influenced the formation of ancient Greek intellectuals. Thus, our paper aims to examine the impact of Heraclitus, Anaximander, and Parmenides on the Aeschylus' *Oresteia* trilogy and *Prometheus Bound*. While we acknowledge the significant differences between a play designed for theatrical interpretation and philosophical treatises, we believe tragedy also explored questions about god, the unity of opposites, the principles of reality, and Greek cosmogony. We relate these questions, raised by human suffering and the complex theology presented in Aeschylus' plays, with the philosophical inquiries and interpretive proposals regarding the Ancient Greek cosmos in Presocratic philosophy. This is supported by works such as Douglas Cairns' *Tragedy and the Archaic Greek Thought* (2013) and Nuria Scapin's recent book, *The Flower of Suffering: Theology, Justice and the Cosmos in Aeschylus' Oresteia and Presocratic Thought* (2020). For that reason, we must come back to the revolutionary thinkers that preceded Aeschylus to fully grasp his tragedy's essential aspects, although caution should be exercised in attempting to tie Aeschylus' poetry to any specific Presocratic thinker. With that in mind, will explore the philosophical correlations among the formation of the cosmos, the unity of opposites, the concept of justice, and the portrayal of Zeus in the plays. Furthermore, we will identify the philosophical roots that influenced the intellectual progress of Classical Athens.
