---
last_name: Trovato
first_name: Giovanni
title: Pythagorean cosmogony transformed. An appraisal of the doxographical evidence.
institution: Università di Pisa
email: giovanni.trovato@phd.unipi.it
---
This paper aims to show that some doxographical accounts concerning Pythagoras and the Pythagoreans stem from a tendency to upgrade an authentic doctrinal core. Therefore, they should be regarded as a middle ground between genuine material and full-fledged forgeries showing no connection with ancient Pythagoreanism. To prove this, I take into account a group of *dóxai* about cosmogony.

44 A 17 DK, for instance, combines Philolaus’ central fire with the image of a keel laid by a *demiourgos theos*. For Philolaus, humans cannot attain any knowledge of the principles underlying the generated universe. Therefore, he did not explain how the central fire came to be out of limiters and unlimiteds. The craftsman-like account of A17 is meant to bridge this gap, providing Philolaus’ cosmogony with an efficient cause, namely God.
A further step in the updating process is exemplified by Aët II.6.2, where “Pythagoras” is credited with the idea that the generation of the universe started “from fire and the fifth element”. We can make sense of this report once we recognize it as an attempt to square Philolaus’ cosmogony with a geocentric model, which leaves no room for a central fire. The peripheral fire, then, is left as the only reasonable starting point of the cosmogonic process
Through a close reading of these and other testimonies, this paper is meant to account for such *dóxai* as a middle ground between authentic and pseudoepigraphic, while accounting for the supervened modifications: they are not fanciful inventions, but rather attempts to sort out theoretical difficulties. As a direct consequence, this analysis will also shed more light on the blatant exploitation of Pythagoreanism in the debate over sempiternalism, as exemplified 44 B 21 DK and Aët II.4.1, attributing to Philolaus and Pythagoras the notion of an ungenerated universe.
