---
last_name: Padilla
first_name: Teresa
title: Anaximenes’ ἀήρ as a respiratory model for explaining the living cosmos
institution: Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México
email: mtpadilla25@hotmail.com
---

The aim of this paper is to show that Anaximenes understands and explains all the natural processes based on a respiratory model in which he applies the two opposed and 
complementary movements: rarefaction and condensation. The elegance of Anaximenes’ 
scientific explanations resides in the fact that he gives specific names to the processes and to the natural phenomena associated with them. Consequently, it is due to the variations of condensation and rarefaction of the air and the interaction among contraries: humid-dry, cold- hot, that change, movement, the origin and the actual state of the Universe can be coherently explained and understood.
Anaximenes’ hilozoism is expressed in terms of a living Universe which breathes. 
The famous expression attributed to Thales πάντα πλήρη θεῶν εἴναι means, in his disciple Anaximenes, that ἀήρ is the primordial element, and the principle of simple bodies which interpenetrates all existing things. As a result, change and movement are also manifested in respiratory terms: the movement of inhalation –which implies a pulmonary expansion– is equivalent to air’s condensation and the movement of exhalation –which involves a pulmonary contraction– is equivalent to air’s rarefaction. It is well known that when Anaximenes refers to the processes of condensation or solidification and rarefication, he took as paradigm the long textile tradition of his region. That is, the work of matting implied the compression of the hair felt and other natural tissues with the aim of giving them texture. 
Natural fibers such as wool, cotton and flax (linen) also breathe. Matting involves 
compression and expansion with the purpose of creating interstitial spaces. In short: 
Anaximenes applies again the respiratory model –which is eventually a medical-biological paradigm– for explaining the treatment of natural tissues.
The ἀήρ is the principle, the divine, primeval element of the cosmic processes: it is 
the original and originative substance from which a regular, causal and sequential order of changes is established in states or processes through two contrary but complementary mecanisms: condensation and rarefaction. The ἀήρ is also, abundant, lively element, life guarantor and with great cohesive and transformative capacity: the world (macrocosmos) and man (microcosmos) are explained by it because the ἀήρ is the breath of life or soul of the Universe.