---
last_name: Campos
first_name: Rogério Gimenes de
title: Archelaus' philosophy
institution: Universidade Federal da Integração Latino Americana
email: rogedecampos@gmail.com
---
Considered as an intermediary between the Ionian doctrines of nature and the change of perspective carried out by Socrates, Archelaus of Athens has been relatively forgotten by historians of philosophy, especially because there is not enough material from which to derive safe and comprehensive conclusions about him (Diels, Kranz, 1951; Guthrie, 1971; Woodbury, 1971; Sider, 1980; Curd, 2007: 134-135; Betegh, 2016; Laks and Most, 2016: 185-217; Curd and Graham, 2018). Arche\-laus' philosophy can be partially studied through relationships with other thinkers, such as Anaximenes, Anaxagoras, Democritus, and Diogenes of Apollonia, who, according to the doxography, would be in Archelaus' philosophical spectrum, as he defended *homeomeries* and air as material principles.

In addition to the complex connection he had with Socrates, in this communication we will explore his cosmogony, seeking to highlight its specificity, as well as relating it to other cosmogonies in circulation at his time. One hypothesis to be verified is that by offering an apparently common cosmogony, similar in its elements to many others, his physical thought would not have attracted the attention of either his contemporaries or later historians, which would explain this relative oblivion. On the other hand, if this is not confirmed, we are left to explain the specificity of his cosmogony, detached from other matrices, reestablishing a specific place for Archelaus within the Greek cosmogonies of the pre-Socratic period.
For this purpose, we will highlight the dissolution (*têkómenon*) of water by the heat of fire and its function in the creation of air and earth, as well as the role of mud (*ilùs*) as a nutrient for all beings, taking Hipólito as the main sources of analysis, (Hippol. *Haer*.1,17), Diogenes Laertius (D.L. 2, 16), and Simplicius (Simp. *in Ph*. 26-27).
